---
published: true
---
# Beagleprint
## Because hacking is fun, and I will look for any excuse to avoid my thesis during a snow storm

Well, here is going to be my first shot at a bonafide blog post. I have decided that the main purpose of this blog will be to document little side projects I complete and problems I manage to solve at home, work, hobbying, and in general. Many of the posts will probably come out as just a culmination of links and research that I have done, but for me that provides a convenient place to go back and find resources without digging through my gargantuan pile of semi-organized bookmarks.

So, without further ado, I will now present you with a description and guide to how I set up my new 3D printer and an Octorpint server running on a Beaglebone Black to control it over the network. This is probably going to turn out very lengthy so I will break it up as makes sense with the content and my time. 

###3D Printer Choice and Initial Setup / Configuration:

I really wanted a 3D printer for Christmas, and thanks to the Amazon gift card gods and many generous ~~donations~~ gifts from family and friends I was able to purchase a Monoprice Maker Select v2.1 (I think, versions are sketchy when dealing with rebranded Chinese stuff. This is a rebranded Wanhao Duplicator i3). I decided on this model because it has all the relevant features, a large community for support and advice, and an unbeatable price at **$330**.

During my primary research phase I did a lot of reading. Before taking the plunge I came to the conclusion that although this model requires some tinkering to get it to print optimally, that is infact exactly what I was looking for in the hobby. I like to solve problems, but nobody wants a headache, which is what you may get with some of the other, cheaper kits out there. This printer comes basically assembled and ready to print out of the box to get you going, then as you gain experience little issues become apparent and give you managable things to tweak, more of a ramp than a wall.

There were some other candidates: the Monoprice Maker Select Mini, genuine Prusa i3, factory Wanhao Duplicator i3 Plus (refresh of this model), basically anything in the $250-$500 range that was Cartesian and not a total turd. The deciding factor for me really was the community documentation. There are alot of i3 clones out there, but I think that the information is so readily available for this specific printer that it just makes sense, there are probably 10,000 of these things in active use.

I opted for the v2 over the plus because I liked the idea of an external control box. If the power supply does ever go up in flames it is not directly under the bed like the newer model. Additionally there is plenty of room for mods: I plan to add some relays to control lights and power via the Beaglebone, and eventually mount the Beaglebone itself into the control box too (right now it is mounted on the underside of the table the printer sits on in my boiler room). Finaly, the actual hardware specs are basically identical between revisions and I couldn't justify an extra ~$100 just for the relocated controls when I could allocate those resources to buy a few spools of filament or spend on some mods required by both models.

Speaking of filament, I bought and will continue to buy mine from MakerGeeks. They make it themselves in the USA to a very high standard, and have fantastic prices. I opted to get the [limited time grab bag](http://www.makergeeks.com/mafigrbag2kg.html) and bought four spools for $60, which is a fscking awesome deal. I got two spools of ABS and two PLA, you don't get to choose color but it's not like I have any specific projects or anything, and you can paint it easily. I ended up with red and yellow PLA and black and green ABS.

When the magic man in the brown truck delivers your printer you open the box (right side up... trust me) and the unit is in three pieces that are fully wired together so you have to take some care to get it all unpacked and oriented correctly. Simple instructions (could be a little more descriptive) show you where to insert something like four screws and then you're off. Pry the factory test print off the bed, level the bed, and print away with one of the four models that come preloaded on the supplied SD card (which is not total and utter crap surprisingly). The files on my card were numbered, but there's a flat butterfly, a baby elephant, a cushy chair, and a swan, I think in that order, your milage may vary. There is also a PDF manual and an old EXE version of Cura with their profile already setup on the card. I did not use the supplied software because I run linux on everything. I found a downloadable INI with the Cura settings somewhere but i ended up creating my own profile from scratch after some trial and error. The main issue turned out to be that the acceleration and jerk are tuned way too high in the factory firmware settings in an attempt to show off how fast this thing can print, to the detriment of print quality. The test prints all print well and at decent speed but I was less successful with those profile settings when trying to print my own designs or things I downloaded from Thingiverse and elsewhere. 

After you burn through the included "10 m" (more like 10 ft) of filament you will inevitably have some work to do. This is where all that great community documentation comes in. I have found [this](http://3dprinterwiki.info/wiki/wanhao-duplicator-i3/) to be the best starting point. You will most certainly want to print up some parts to beef up the rigidity of the frame. I have not printed the Z braces as of yet because I want to do them in ABS and have not gotten all the settings down for good ABS prints yet. I printed the [DiiiCooler] though and holy mackeral has it helped with most issues.

You will want some extra tools too, namely a little level to check all your guide rods and frame alignment (and the table the printer is on... mine was horribly off kilter and I had to compensate with some cedar shingle wedges on the two front feet), Xacto knife, CA glue, zip ties, acetone, rubbing alcohol, and certainly some metric hex drivers. I have found that the knockoff BuildTak build surface is sticky enough for both PLA and ABS as long as wou wipe it with isopropyl first to remove any grease or residue. 

I later found out that prints can adhere *too* well to the bed, especially ABS at high temperatures, and they may or may not bond together completely. This will result in you having to tear off all that build surface and get the adhesive underneath off too... and this task my friends is a 100% guaranteed total pain in the ass or your money back. You may find that if this happens to you that after you get all of the old build surface and glue off of the aluminum bed that now is probably the best time to order yourself a borosilicate bed and silicone thermal pad because you certainly do not want to struggle with that shit ever again. For anyone who is looking to remove that helacious goop from their aluminum bed, I tried isopropyl, acetone, and Goo Gone with varying degrees of success. Goo Gone with the bed turned to ~68C worked best. If you get the bed too hot the glue actually bonds better and becomes even more difficult to remove. Don't use any metallic scrapers (like the one supplied with the kit that you already tried) because it will gouge the shit out of the aluminum bed (steel > aluminum, thanks Mohs). I used an old gift card to scrape / roll / drag the glue off after letting the Goo Gone set for a few minutes while the bed heated. It took a while and was frustrating but it does all eventually come off.

##Stay Tuned for [Part 2: Octoprint Configuration](link to part 2 here)
